7.2 advanced interactivity (#157)
UBC-MDS/exploratory-data-viz: chapters/en/slides/module7/module7_02.Rmd

Whether we change the color or opacity on selection is mostly an aesthetic choice.

We assign the chart to a variable name because we will reuse it in the next slide
and set the dimensions of the plot to fit on later slides 
with more complex layouts.

---

## Combining charts with different selections

```{python}
brush = alt.selection_interval()
points = (alt.Chart(cars).mark_circle().encode(
    x='Horsepower',
    y='Miles_per_Gallon',
    color=alt.condition(brush, 'Origin', alt.value('lightgray')))
.add_selection(brush)).properties(width=300, height=200)

points & bars
```

Notes:
To add two charts together,
we can use what we learned previously about Altair's layout operators.
To concatenate the charts vertically,
we're here using the `&` operator.

In contrast to the two scatterplots in an earlier slide,
these charts are not created from the same base chart,
so there selections are not linked.

What if we want to link the selections
so that when we select a region of origin in the bar chart
the points in the scatter plot that are from the same origin would be highlighted?

This would be useful to study observations from each Origin separately,

> so how can we perform this linkage in Altair?

Author: Yeah, I wasn't sure if this was correct when I wrote it but didn't have time to test fully. I did now and the behavior occurs when when there is an aggregate chart create. If I remember correctly about how VL works, it creates a new dataframe with the aggregate data and there is no link to the original data, so automatic linking is not possible.

---

## Linking selections from separate charts requires explicit columns to select on

```{python}
click = alt.selection_multi(fields=['Origin'])
bars = bars.add_selection(click)
points = points.encode(opacity=alt.condition(click, alt.value(0.9), alt.value(0.2)))

> points & bars

Reviewer: Reusing the scatter plot and barplot code here, and overwriting the points and bar selection is a bit confusing and adds unnecessary cognitive load in my opinion. Let's just make a fresh scatter plot and bar chart from scratch each time please.

I know space might be an issue, but if you do horizontal concatenation, you might have enough space?

```

Notes:

> To link separate charts together,
> we need to be explicit about what happens when a selection is made.
> 
> For example,
> to link a click of a bar 
> to a selection in the scatterplot,
> we need to say which column in the dataframe should be used to select on.
> 
> In this case,
> we only have a single column that we use in the chart `"Origin"`,
> so this is both our only option
> and what we want since both the barchart and scatterplot
> contain this column as an encoding in the chart.
> 
> To successfully link this selection
> we need to do three things:
> 
> 1. Create a new selection that specifies which columns should be used for selections (the `fields` parameter).
> 2. Add this new selection to the bar plot
> 3. Add an encoding to the scatterplot that depends on the new `click` selections. Here we use `opacity`.
> 
> Now that we click the bars
> the opacity of the corresponding points changes
> as we would expect!
> 
> Note that we can still click and drag in the scatterplot
> since our `brush` selection is unchanged from previously.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To link separate charts together,
we need to be explicit about what happens when a selection is made.

For example,
to link a click of a bar 
to a selection in the scatterplot,
we need to say which data frame column should be used for the selection.

In this case, `"Origin"` is the column that we want to use 
for the selection, as it is the common encoding between 
both charts. 

If there were two or more data frame columns that were common
encodings in both charts, then you would select the one 
that made more sense for the question you were asking.

To successfully link this selection
we need to do three things:

1. Create a new selection that specifies which columns should be used for selections (the `fields` parameter).
2. Add this new selection to the bar plot
3. Add an encoding to the scatterplot that depends on the new `click` selections. Here we use `opacity`.

Now that we click the bars
the opacity of the corresponding points changes
as we would expect!

Note that we can still click and drag in the scatterplot
since our `brush` selection is unchanged from before.
```

> 

Author: We show this with transform filter a few slides later. The order could be switch to show that first but I think it is also natural to talk about how to link clicks to a legend instead of a chart so keeping as is.

---

## A selection can be bound to the legend instead of a particular chart

```{python}
click_legend = alt.selection_multi(fields=['Origin'], bind='legend')
points = points.encode(opacity=alt.condition(click_legend, alt.value(0.9), alt.value(0.2)))

> points.add_selection(click_legend)

Reviewer: Reusing issue again here...

```

Notes:

> We don't always have a barchart to drive the selections from.
> What if we only created a scatterplot,
> but still wanted to be able to select data from different Origins?
> 
> Instead of using a separate chart,
> we could use the legend to make the selections.
> We can specify to Altair that we want to make the legend interactive,
> by binding `selection_multi` to it.
> 
> We then need to link this new selection
> (called `click_legend` to distinguish it from the previous slide)
> to the points opacity encoding and add it to the plot.
> 
> Now if you click the legend,
> it will select the corresponding observations in the scatterplot!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We don't always have a bar chart to drive the selections from.
What if we only create a scatterplot,
but still want to be able to select data from different origins?

Instead of using a separate chart,
we could use the legend to make the selections.

We can tell Altair that we want to make the legend interactive,
by binding `selection_multi` to it.

We then need to link this new selection
to the points opacity encoding and add it to the plot.

Now if you click the legend,
it will select the corresponding observations in the scatterplot!
```

---

## Legend selections can be added to multiple charts

```{python}
bars = bars.encode(opacity=alt.condition(click_legend, alt.value(0.9), alt.value(0.2)))

> (points & bars).add_selection(click_legend) 

Reviewer: Reusing issue again here...

```

Notes:
When creating a combined charts the syntax 
for adding the legend interactivity is similar,
but we need to add the selection to both charts
since the legend belongs to both of them.

We could do this one by one,

> or both at once as we do in this slide.

Author: less typing if both

---

## Instead of highlighting, a selection can be used for filtering data

```{python}
bars = bars.transform_filter(brush)

> (points & bars).add_selection(click_legend) 

Reviewer: Reusing issue again here...

```

Notes:
So far we have seen how to change graphical encodings such as color and opacity
to highlight points in the data.
Another useful type of interactivity is to actually filter the data
based on a selection,
rather than just styling the chart appearance.

For example,
we might wonder how many cars from different regions
that we have selected when we drag in the scatter plot.
Let's change the bar chart to update dynamically 
as we select points in the scatterplot.

We can do this by adding a transform filter to our bar plot.
Transform filters can filter data similarly to what we might do in pandas,
but are not as powerful in general
so they are best used for operations
like interactive filtering which are not possible in pandas.
This type of interaction is sometimes called a dynamic query.

We're keeping the legend here since we have conditions 
in the charts' encodings that depend on the `legend_click` selection variable,
but we could remove it if we change these.

Now that we have select points by dragging in the scatter plot
we can see that the barchart updates the count
to reflect the number of points we have selected of each color,

> neat!

Author: Unfortunately we need to keep it or recreate the chart. All interactions that occur inside condition of a chart need to be added as selections for the VL specification to be valid.

---

## Fixing the extent of the x-axis makes the bars easier to compare

```{python}
bar_chart_max = cars.groupby('Origin').size().max()
bars = bars.encode(alt.X('count()', scale=alt.Scale(domain=[0, bar_chart_max])))

> (points & bars).add_selection(click_legend) 

Reviewer: Reusing issue again here...

```

Notes:
It is a bit non-intuitive that the x-axis keep changing its extent
as we select different number of points,
and it makes the bar heights harder to compare
as we move the selection around.
Ideally only the bars would change length,
but the axis would stay the same.

In this slide we calculate the max number of cars
from any region
and then use this number to fix the extent of the x-axis.
Now that we select in the scatterplot,
only the lengths of the bars changes,
but the range of the axis remains the same.

> 

Reviewer: What about fixing the number of categories on the y-axis? Should we do that too? It might make it easier, especially in plots with more than 3 categories...

Author: I don't think this is trivial,otherwise would be good.

We have added a helpful tooltip
that shows which state we are hovering over
as well as the exact number of asthma cases in that state,
which would be hard to read out from the color alone.

We used `alt.Tooltip` to change the title in the tooltip,
just as when we change the title of an axis or legend.

We also added a `selction_single` interaction,
but instead of binding it to mouse clicks (the default),
we bound it to `'mouseover'`,
which is when we are hovering over a state with the mouse pointer.

In this slide we can use this interaction
to highlight a particular state in the choropleth
and in the next slide
we will see how we can also link it to another chart.

We set the dimensions of the plot to fit on the slide.

---

## Linking a map selection to another chart

```{python}
points = (alt.Chart(state_pop).mark_circle(size=70).encode(
    alt.X('asthma_cases_per_capita', title='Asthma cases / capita', scale=alt.Scale(zero=False)),
    alt.Y('number_of_asthma_cases', title='Asthma cases'),
    stroke=alt.condition(map_hover, alt.value('black'), alt.value('#ffffff')),
    color='number_of_asthma_cases')).properties(height=150, width=300)
choropleth & points
```

Notes:

> To link an interaction on a map to another chart,
> we use the same logic as we did in previous slides
> for linking the barchart and scatterplot.
> 
> Here we create a separate scatterplot
> where the stroke color of each points depends on
> whether we have selected that state on the map or not.
> 
> By default
> all states on the map are selected 
> so all the points have a black outline.
> As we hover over a state in the map,
> the outline changes to white for the points
> whose states are not selected in the map.
> 
> In addition to adding one more visualization for the asthma cases,
> using the map to identify states can be more helpful
> than just adding a tooltip to the scatterplot
> since we might already have an intuition 
> for where different states are located on the map
> and don't have to go through each of the point's tooltip
> looking for the state name of interest.
> 
> TODO we could change this to be another variable in the map like population, I don't have a strong opinion, both have advantages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To link an interaction on a map to another chart,
we use the same logic as we did in previous slides
for linking the bar chart and scatterplot.

Here we create a separate scatterplot
where the stroke colour (outline) of each points depends on
whether we have selected that state on the map or not.

By default,
all states on the map are selected 
so all the points have a black outline.
As we hover over a state in the map,
the outline changes to white for the points
whose states are not selected in the map.

Using the map to identify states can be more helpful
than just adding a tooltip to the scatterplot
since we might already have an intuition 
for where different states are located on the map
and don't have to go through each of the point's tooltip
looking for the state name of interest.

TODO we could change this to be another variable in the map like population, I don't have a strong opinion, both have advantages.
```

> 

Reviewer: This slide kind of begs the linked view to also go in the other direction - from the scatter plot to the map. For example, it would be cool to have the state name show up when hovering over a point, and then have that state highlighted on the map. Also, it would be cool to be able to select, or brush over multiple points and see them highlighted on the map.

Author: adding to wishlist
